in this video
Let us discuss how to insert a node at the
end of
doubly linked list
So here the new node will be inserted at
the end of the doubly linked list
For example we have this linked list 10 20 30
Now if we insert a new node 100 it will
be inserted at the end
And we will get the new doubly linked List
Like this
10 20 30 100
Now let us see how to insert a new node
at the end
Here we will have two cases
The first case is when the doubly linked list is
empty
Then the new node inserted will be the only node
and it becomes the head node
The second cases when the doubly linked list is not
empty and it has some nodes in it
So we need to traverse the linked list to find
the last node and then insert the new node after
that last node
Now let us see the Java programme to insert a
new node at the end of it doubly linked list
So this is the function which will add the new
node at the end and we will pass the value
to be added to the function
Add last and it will create a new node with
that value and inserted at the end of the list
So we have public
void add last of int Val let us See how it works
So here first we have an empty doubly linked list
So head is equal to not let us now insert
a new node with value 10 to this list
So we will call this function add last by passing the
value 10 So val will be equal to 10
Now let us see what happens
First we need to create a new node using new
operator
So write node new node equal to new node
So we have a new node created at address 1000
Now add the data to the data part
So write new node dot data equal to val So
10 is added to the data part
Now if the doubly linked list is empty the new
node will be the only node and it becomes the
head
Otherwise we need to find the last node of the
list and in certain new node after the last node
So check it write If head equal to null and
here Head is equal to null
So if will return to true that is this new node
will be the only node in this list
So it's next and prev should point to null so
set new node dot prev equal to null and new
node dot next equal to null Now the next step
is to make this node the head so write head
equal to new node
So the head has the address 1000 now and points
to this new node So now we have a doubly
linked list with one node
Now let us insert another node with value 20 to this
list
So first call the functions add last by passing the value
20 And this function will now create a new node
using new
So a new node is created at address 2000 like
this Now at the value 20 to the data part So
write new node dot data equal to val So 20
is added here so the new node is ready to
be inserted
So now we need to find where to insert it
So first check if the doubly linked list is empty
but it is not so go to the else part
so the doubly linked list is not empty so the
new node should be inserted after the last node
And for that we have to find the last node
And for the last node it's next will be pointing
to null
So we have to
iterate the linked list till the next part of
the node is null
So create a temporary node last to find the last
node and we should start from the head till we
reach the end
So initialised last to head So write node last equal
to head now for traversing the list
We need a while
loop so write while last next not equal to null
and in each iteration last it's moved one place to
the right by this line of code last equal to
last dot next
But here we have last pointing to head and it's
next is equal to null so condition will fail in
first iteration itself
It is because we have only one node in this
list
So last node and head node is the same node
and while loop is terminated here and now
Last points to the last node which is the head
here so we have last not pointed by last
So insert the new node after the last node
So make this last node point to a new node
So write last dot next equal to new node Now
New nodes prev should point the current last node
so write new node prev equal to last and finally
set new node next equal to null
So the new node is inserted at the end of
this list
Now let us see another example that has insert another
node with value 30
So first create the node using new
So the node is created at Address 3000
Like this now add the value 30 at the data
part Now check
If the doubly linked list is empty but it is
not so go to the else part now
The new node should be inserted after the last node
so we have to
iterate the linked list to find the last node
and then insert the new node after the last node
So first create the temporary node last and initialised it
to head
Now we have the while loop and in first iteration last
is pointing to node at 1000 it's next is not
equal to null
So last equal to last dot Next
So last now points to the node at 2000 and
it's next is equal to null
So the condition fails in the next iteration and the
loop will terminate and now last is pointing to the
last node
So make this last node point to our new node
So write last dot next equal to new node
That is the node at 3000
Now new nodes prev should point the current last node
So write new node prev equal to last and finally
set new nodes next equal to null
So the new node is inserted at the end of
this list
Now let us talk about the time complexity to
find the last node we have to traverse the entire
linked list
And for that order of n time is needed
And to insert we need order of one time
So insertion at the end of a list takes order n time